doc/api/esm.md, before:

# ECMAScript Modules

<!--introduced_in=v8.5.0-->
<!-- type=misc -->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

<!--name=esm-->

Node.js contains support for ES Modules based upon the
[Node.js EP for ES Modules][] and the [ESM Minimal Kernel][].

The minimal feature set is designed to be compatible with all potential
future implementations. Expect major changes in the implementation including
interoperability support, specifier resolution, and default behavior.

## Enabling

<!-- type=misc -->

The `--experimental-modules` flag can be used to enable features for loading
ESM modules.

Once this has been set, files ending with `.mjs` will be able to be loaded
as ES Modules.

```sh
node --experimental-modules my-app.mjs
```

## Features

<!-- type=misc -->

### Supported

Only the CLI argument for the main entry point to the program can be an entry
point into an ESM graph. Dynamic import can also be used to create entry points
into ESM graphs at runtime.

#### import.meta

* {Object}

The `import.meta` metaproperty is an `Object` that contains the following
property:

* `url` {string} The absolute `file:` URL of the module.

### Unsupported

| Feature | Reason |
| --- | --- |
| `require('./foo.mjs')` | ES Modules have differing resolution and timing, use dynamic import |

## Notable differences between `import` and `require`

### Mandatory file extensions

You must provide a file extension when using the `import` keyword.

### No NODE_PATH

`NODE_PATH` is not part of resolving `import` specifiers. Please use symlinks
if this behavior is desired.

### No `require.extensions`

`require.extensions` is not used by `import`. The expectation is that loader
hooks can provide this workflow in the future.

### No `require.cache`

`require.cache` is not used by `import`. It has a separate cache.

### URL based paths

ESM are resolved and cached based upon [URL](https://url.spec.whatwg.org/)
semantics. This means that files containing special characters such as `#` and
`?` need to be escaped.

Modules will be loaded multiple times if the `import` specifier used to resolve
them have a different query or fragment.

```js
import './foo.mjs?query=1'; // loads ./foo.mjs with query of "?query=1"
import './foo.mjs?query=2'; // loads ./foo.mjs with query of "?query=2"
```

For now, only modules using the `file:` protocol can be loaded.

## CommonJS, JSON, and Native Modules

CommonJS, JSON, and Native modules can be used with [`module.createRequireFromPath()`][].

```js
// cjs.js
module.exports = 'cjs';

// esm.mjs
import { createRequireFromPath as createRequire } from 'module';
import { fileURLToPath as fromPath } from 'url';

const require = createRequire(fromPath(import.meta.url));

const cjs = require('./cjs');
cjs === 'cjs'; // true
```

## Builtin modules

Builtin modules will provide named exports of their public API, as well as a
default export which can be used for, among other things, modifying the named
exports. Named exports of builtin modules are updated when the corresponding
exports property is accessed, redefined, or deleted.

```js
import EventEmitter from 'events';
const e = new EventEmitter();
```

```js
import { readFile } from 'fs';
readFile('./foo.txt', (err, source) => {
  if (err) {
    console.error(err);
  } else {
    console.log(source);
  }
});
```

```js
import fs, { readFileSync } from 'fs';

fs.readFileSync = () => Buffer.from('Hello, ESM');

fs.readFileSync === readFileSync;
```

## Resolution Algorithm

### Features

The resolver has the following properties:

* FileURL-based resolution as is used by ES modules
* Support for builtin module loading
* Relative and absolute URL resolution
* No default extensions
* No folder mains
* Bare specifier package resolution lookup through node_modules

### Resolver Algorithm

The algorithm to load an ES module specifier is given through the
**ESM_RESOLVE** method below. It returns the resolved URL for a
module specifier relative to a parentURL, in addition to the unique module
format for that resolved URL given by the **ESM_FORMAT** routine.

The _"esm"_ format is returned for an ECMAScript Module, while the
_"legacy"_ format is used to indicate loading through the legacy
CommonJS loader. Additional formats such as _"wasm"_ or _"addon"_ can be
extended in future updates.

In the following algorithms, all subroutine errors are propogated as errors
of these top-level routines.

_isMain_ is **true** when resolving the Node.js application entry point.

**ESM_RESOLVE(_specifier_, _parentURL_, _isMain_)**
> 1. Let _resolvedURL_ be **undefined**.
> 1. If _specifier_ is a valid URL, then
>    1. Set _resolvedURL_ to the result of parsing and reserializing
>       _specifier_ as a URL.
> 1. Otherwise, if _specifier_ starts with _"/"_, then
>    1. Throw an _Invalid Specifier_ error.
> 1. Otherwise, if _specifier_ starts with _"./"_ or _"../"_, then
>    1. Set _resolvedURL_ to the URL resolution of _specifier_ relative to
>       _parentURL_.
> 1. Otherwise,
>    1. Note: _specifier_ is now a bare specifier.
>    1. Set _resolvedURL_ the result of
>       **PACKAGE_RESOLVE**(_specifier_, _parentURL_).
> 1. If the file at _resolvedURL_ does not exist, then
>    1. Throw a _Module Not Found_ error.
> 1. Let _format_ be the result of **ESM_FORMAT**(_url_, _isMain_).
> 1. Load _resolvedURL_ as module format, _format_.

PACKAGE_RESOLVE(_packageSpecifier_, _parentURL_)
> 1. Let _packageName_ be *undefined*.
> 1. Let _packageSubpath_ be *undefined*.
> 1. If _packageSpecifier_ is an empty string, then
>    1. Throw an _Invalid Specifier_ error.
> 1. If _packageSpecifier_ does not start with _"@"_, then
>    1. Set _packageName_ to the substring of _packageSpecifier_ until the
>       first _"/"_ separator or the end of the string.
> 1. Otherwise,
>    1. If _packageSpecifier_ does not contain a _"/"_ separator, then
>       1. Throw an _Invalid Specifier_ error.
>    1. Set _packageName_ to the substring of _packageSpecifier_
>       until the second _"/"_ separator or the end of the string.
> 1. Let _packageSubpath_ be the substring of _packageSpecifier_ from the
>    position at the length of _packageName_ plus one, if any.
> 1. Assert: _packageName_ is a valid package name or scoped package name.
> 1. Assert: _packageSubpath_ is either empty, or a path without a leading
>    separator.
> 1. If _packageSubpath_ contains any _"."_ or _".."_ segments or percent
>    encoded strings for _"/"_ or _"\"_ then,
>    1. Throw an _Invalid Specifier_ error.
> 1. If _packageSubpath_ is empty and _packageName_ is a Node.js builtin
>    module, then
>    1. Return the string _"node:"_ concatenated with _packageSpecifier_.
> 1. While _parentURL_ is not the file system root,
>    1. Set _parentURL_ to the parent folder URL of _parentURL_.
>    1. Let _packageURL_ be the URL resolution of the string concatenation of
>       _parentURL_, _"/node_modules/"_ and _packageSpecifier_.
>    1. If the folder at _packageURL_ does not exist, then
>       1. Set _parentURL_ to the parent URL path of _parentURL_.
>       1. Continue the next loop iteration.
>    1. Let _pjson_ be the result of **READ_PACKAGE_JSON**(_packageURL_).
>    1. If _packageSubpath_ is empty, then
>       1. Return the result of **PACKAGE_MAIN_RESOLVE**(_packageURL_,
>          _pjson_).
>    1. Otherwise,
>       1. Return the URL resolution of _packageSubpath_ in _packageURL_.
> 1. Throw a _Module Not Found_ error.

PACKAGE_MAIN_RESOLVE(_packageURL_, _pjson_)
> 1. If _pjson_ is **null**, then
>    1. Throw a _Module Not Found_ error.
> 1. If _pjson.main_ is a String, then
>    1. Let _resolvedMain_ be the concatenation of _packageURL_, "/", and
>       _pjson.main_.
>    1. If the file at _resolvedMain_ exists, then
>       1. Return _resolvedMain_.
> 1. If _pjson.type_ is equal to _"esm"_, then
>    1. Throw a _Module Not Found_ error.
> 1. Let _legacyMainURL_ be the result applying the legacy
>    **LOAD_AS_DIRECTORY** CommonJS resolver to _packageURL_, throwing a
>    _Module Not Found_ error for no resolution.
> 1. If _legacyMainURL_ does not end in _".js"_ then,
>    1. Throw an _Unsupported File Extension_ error.
> 1. Return _legacyMainURL_.

**ESM_FORMAT(_url_, _isMain_)**
> 1. Assert: _url_ corresponds to an existing file.
> 1. Let _pjson_ be the result of **READ_PACKAGE_BOUNDARY**(_url_).
> 1. If _pjson_ is **null** and _isMain_ is **true**, then
>    1. Return _"legacy"_.
> 1. If _pjson.type_ exists and is _"esm"_, then
>    1. If _url_ does not end in _".js"_ or _".mjs"_, then
>       1. Throw an _Unsupported File Extension_ error.
>    1. Return _"esm"_.
> 1. Otherwise,
>    1. If _url_ ends in _".mjs"_, then
>       1. Return _"esm"_.
>    1. Otherwise,
>       1. Return _"legacy"_.

READ_PACKAGE_BOUNDARY(_url_)
> 1. Let _boundaryURL_ be _url_.
> 1. While _boundaryURL_ is not the file system root,
>    1. Let _pjson_ be the result of **READ_PACKAGE_JSON**(_boundaryURL_).
>    1. If _pjson_ is not **null**, then
>       1. Return _pjson_.
>    1. Set _boundaryURL_ to the parent URL of _boundaryURL_.
> 1. Return **null**.

READ_PACKAGE_JSON(_packageURL_)
> 1. Let _pjsonURL_ be the resolution of _"package.json"_ within _packageURL_.
> 1. If the file at _pjsonURL_ does not exist, then
>    1. Return **null**.
> 1. If the file at _packageURL_ does not parse as valid JSON, then
>    1. Throw an _Invalid Package Configuration_ error.
> 1. Return the parsed JSON source of the file at _pjsonURL_.

[Node.js EP for ES Modules]: https://github.com/nodejs/node-eps/blob/master/002-es-modules.md
[`module.createRequireFromPath()`]: modules.html#modules_module_createrequirefrompath_filename
[ESM Minimal Kernel]: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/blob/master/doc/plan-for-new-modules-implementation.md

Commit message:

esm: top-level --type, -m flags, spec updates

doc/api/esm.md, after:

# ECMAScript Modules

<!--introduced_in=v8.5.0-->
<!-- type=misc -->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

<!--name=esm-->

Node.js contains support for ES Modules based upon the
[Node.js EP for ES Modules][] and the [ESM Minimal Kernel][].

The minimal feature set is designed to be compatible with all potential
future implementations. Expect major changes in the implementation including
interoperability support, specifier resolution, and default behavior.

## Enabling

<!-- type=misc -->

The `--experimental-modules` flag can be used to enable features for loading
ESM modules.

Once this has been set, files ending with `.mjs` will be able to be loaded
as ES Modules.

```sh
node --experimental-modules my-app.mjs
```

## Features

<!-- type=misc -->

### Supported

Only the CLI argument for the main entry point to the program can be an entry
point into an ESM graph. Dynamic import can also be used to create entry points
into ESM graphs at runtime.

#### import.meta

* {Object}

The `import.meta` metaproperty is an `Object` that contains the following
property:

* `url` {string} The absolute `file:` URL of the module.

### Unsupported

| Feature | Reason |
| --- | --- |
| `require('./foo.mjs')` | ES Modules have differing resolution and timing, use dynamic import |

## Notable differences between `import` and `require`

### Mandatory file extensions

You must provide a file extension when using the `import` keyword.

### No NODE_PATH

`NODE_PATH` is not part of resolving `import` specifiers. Please use symlinks
if this behavior is desired.

### No `require.extensions`

`require.extensions` is not used by `import`. The expectation is that loader
hooks can provide this workflow in the future.

### No `require.cache`

`require.cache` is not used by `import`. It has a separate cache.

### URL based paths

ESM are resolved and cached based upon [URL](https://url.spec.whatwg.org/)
semantics. This means that files containing special characters such as `#` and
`?` need to be escaped.

Modules will be loaded multiple times if the `import` specifier used to resolve
them have a different query or fragment.

```js
import './foo.mjs?query=1'; // loads ./foo.mjs with query of "?query=1"
import './foo.mjs?query=2'; // loads ./foo.mjs with query of "?query=2"
```

For now, only modules using the `file:` protocol can be loaded.

## CommonJS, JSON, and Native Modules

CommonJS, JSON, and Native modules can be used with [`module.createRequireFromPath()`][].

```js
// cjs.js
module.exports = 'cjs';

// esm.mjs
import { createRequireFromPath as createRequire } from 'module';
import { fileURLToPath as fromPath } from 'url';

const require = createRequire(fromPath(import.meta.url));

const cjs = require('./cjs');
cjs === 'cjs'; // true
```

## Builtin modules

Builtin modules will provide named exports of their public API, as well as a
default export which can be used for, among other things, modifying the named
exports. Named exports of builtin modules are updated when the corresponding
exports property is accessed, redefined, or deleted.

```js
import EventEmitter from 'events';
const e = new EventEmitter();
```

```js
import { readFile } from 'fs';
readFile('./foo.txt', (err, source) => {
  if (err) {
    console.error(err);
  } else {
    console.log(source);
  }
});
```

```js
import fs, { readFileSync } from 'fs';

fs.readFileSync = () => Buffer.from('Hello, ESM');

fs.readFileSync === readFileSync;
```

## Resolution Algorithm

### Features

The resolver has the following properties:

* FileURL-based resolution as is used by ES modules
* Support for builtin module loading
* Relative and absolute URL resolution
* No default extensions
* No folder mains
* Bare specifier package resolution lookup through node_modules

### Resolver Algorithm

The algorithm to load an ES module specifier is given through the
**ESM_RESOLVE** method below. It returns the resolved URL for a
module specifier relative to a parentURL, in addition to the unique module
format for that resolved URL given by the **ESM_FORMAT** routine.

The _"module"_ format is returned for an ECMAScript Module, while the
_"commonjs"_ format is used to indicate loading through the legacy
CommonJS loader. Additional formats such as _"wasm"_ or _"addon"_ can be
extended in future updates.

In the following algorithms, all subroutine errors are propogated as errors
of these top-level routines.

_isMain_ is **true** when resolving the Node.js application entry point.

If the top-level `--type` is _"commonjs"_, then the ESM resolver is skipped
entirely for the CommonJS loader.

If the top-level `--type` is _"module"_, then the ESM resolver is used
as described here, with the conditional `--type` check in **ESM_FORMAT**.

**ESM_RESOLVE(_specifier_, _parentURL_, _isMain_)**
> 1. Let _resolvedURL_ be **undefined**.
> 1. If _specifier_ is a valid URL, then
>    1. Set _resolvedURL_ to the result of parsing and reserializing
>       _specifier_ as a URL.
> 1. Otherwise, if _specifier_ starts with _"/"_, then
>    1. Throw an _Invalid Specifier_ error.
> 1. Otherwise, if _specifier_ starts with _"./"_ or _"../"_, then
>    1. Set _resolvedURL_ to the URL resolution of _specifier_ relative to
>       _parentURL_.
> 1. Otherwise,
>    1. Note: _specifier_ is now a bare specifier.
>    1. Set _resolvedURL_ the result of
>       **PACKAGE_RESOLVE**(_specifier_, _parentURL_).
> 1. If the file at _resolvedURL_ does not exist, then
>    1. Throw a _Module Not Found_ error.
> 1. Let _format_ be the result of **ESM_FORMAT**(_url_, _isMain_).
> 1. Load _resolvedURL_ as module format, _format_.

PACKAGE_RESOLVE(_packageSpecifier_, _parentURL_)
> 1. Let _packageName_ be *undefined*.
> 1. Let _packageSubpath_ be *undefined*.
> 1. If _packageSpecifier_ is an empty string, then
>    1. Throw an _Invalid Specifier_ error.
> 1. If _packageSpecifier_ does not start with _"@"_, then
>    1. Set _packageName_ to the substring of _packageSpecifier_ until the
>       first _"/"_ separator or the end of the string.
> 1. Otherwise,
>    1. If _packageSpecifier_ does not contain a _"/"_ separator, then
>       1. Throw an _Invalid Specifier_ error.
>    1. Set _packageName_ to the substring of _packageSpecifier_
>       until the second _"/"_ separator or the end of the string.
> 1. Let _packageSubpath_ be the substring of _packageSpecifier_ from the
>    position at the length of _packageName_ plus one, if any.
> 1. Assert: _packageName_ is a valid package name or scoped package name.
> 1. Assert: _packageSubpath_ is either empty, or a path without a leading
>    separator.
> 1. If _packageSubpath_ contains any _"."_ or _".."_ segments or percent
>    encoded strings for _"/"_ or _"\"_ then,
>    1. Throw an _Invalid Specifier_ error.
> 1. If _packageSubpath_ is empty and _packageName_ is a Node.js builtin
>    module, then
>    1. Return the string _"node:"_ concatenated with _packageSpecifier_.
> 1. While _parentURL_ is not the file system root,
>    1. Set _parentURL_ to the parent folder URL of _parentURL_.
>    1. Let _packageURL_ be the URL resolution of the string concatenation of
>       _parentURL_, _"/node_modules/"_ and _packageSpecifier_.
>    1. If the folder at _packageURL_ does not exist, then
>       1. Set _parentURL_ to the parent URL path of _parentURL_.
>       1. Continue the next loop iteration.
>    1. Let _pjson_ be the result of **READ_PACKAGE_JSON**(_packageURL_).
>    1. If _packageSubpath_ is empty, then
>       1. Return the result of **PACKAGE_MAIN_RESOLVE**(_packageURL_,
>          _pjson_).
>    1. Otherwise,
>       1. Return the URL resolution of _packageSubpath_ in _packageURL_.
> 1. Throw a _Module Not Found_ error.

PACKAGE_MAIN_RESOLVE(_packageURL_, _pjson_)
> 1. If _pjson_ is **null**, then
>    1. Throw a _Module Not Found_ error.
> 1. If _pjson.main_ is a String, then
>    1. Let _resolvedMain_ be the concatenation of _packageURL_, "/", and
>       _pjson.main_.
>    1. If the file at _resolvedMain_ exists, then
>       1. Return _resolvedMain_.
> 1. If _pjson.type_ is equal to _"module"_, then
>    1. Throw a _Module Not Found_ error.
> 1. Let _legacyMainURL_ be the result applying the legacy
>    **LOAD_AS_DIRECTORY** CommonJS resolver to _packageURL_, throwing a
>    _Module Not Found_ error for no resolution.
> 1. If _legacyMainURL_ does not end in _".js"_ then,
>    1. Throw an _Unsupported File Extension_ error.
> 1. Return _legacyMainURL_.

**ESM_FORMAT(_url_, _isMain_)**
> 1. Assert: _url_ corresponds to an existing file.
> 1. If _isMain_ is **true** and the `--type` flag is _"module"_, then
>    1. If _url_ ends with _".cjs"_, then
>       1. Throw an _Invalid File Extension_ error.
>    1. Return _"module"_.
> 1. Let _pjson_ be the result of **READ_PACKAGE_BOUNDARY**(_url_).
> 1. If _pjson_ is **null** and _isMain_ is **true**, then
>    1. Return _"commonjs"_.
> 1. If _pjson.type_ exists and is _"module"_, then
>    1. If _url_ ends in _".cjs"_, then
>       1. Return _"commonjs"_.
>    1. If _url_ does not end in _".js"_ or _".mjs"_, then
>       1. Throw an _Unsupported File Extension_ error.
>    1. Return _"module"_.
> 1. Otherwise,
>    1. If _url_ ends in _".mjs"_, then
>       1. Return _"module"_.
>    1. Otherwise,
>       1. Return _"commonjs"_.

READ_PACKAGE_BOUNDARY(_url_)
> 1. Let _boundaryURL_ be _url_.
> 1. While _boundaryURL_ is not the file system root,
>    1. Let _pjson_ be the result of **READ_PACKAGE_JSON**(_boundaryURL_).
>    1. If _pjson_ is not **null**, then
>       1. Return _pjson_.
>    1. Set _boundaryURL_ to the parent URL of _boundaryURL_.
> 1. Return **null**.

READ_PACKAGE_JSON(_packageURL_)
> 1. Let _pjsonURL_ be the resolution of _"package.json"_ within _packageURL_.
> 1. If the file at _pjsonURL_ does not exist, then
>    1. Return **null**.
> 1. If the file at _packageURL_ does not parse as valid JSON, then
>    1. Throw an _Invalid Package Configuration_ error.
> 1. Return the parsed JSON source of the file at _pjsonURL_.

[Node.js EP for ES Modules]: https://github.com/nodejs/node-eps/blob/master/002-es-modules.md
[`module.createRequireFromPath()`]: modules.html#modules_module_createrequirefrompath_filename
[ESM Minimal Kernel]: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/blob/master/doc/plan-for-new-modules-implementation.md
